Best of Binutils and other ELF introspection tool (#94)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/best-of-binutils.md

---
title: "Best of GNU Binutils and other ELF introspection tools"
description: "A guide of how to make the most of GNU binutils to examine binaries using tools such as
readelf, nm, and objdump with practical examples"
image: ""
tags: [better-firmware, fw-code-size]
author: chris
---

There's a lot that takes place between the C code you write
and the binary that winds up executing on a device. Understanding how to look at and inspect
what is emitted by the compiler saves time and improves can improve your efficiency in many areas
of the development lifecycle -- such
as debugging system problems, identifying issues with compilers or

> debug info emitted, reducing the size of binaries, and optimizing an application for performance and minimal latency.

Reviewer: Probably remove the word "minimal"

<!-- excerpt start -->

> In this article, we will explore some of the best binary introspection tools available such as GNU

Reviewer: Would love for you to make this more personal and less click-baity, likely by saying "we will explore some of my favorite binary introspection tools, such as GNU Binutils."

Binutils. We will walk through practical examples of how the tools can be leveraged to aid in the
embedded development process irrespective of the compiler you are using (e.g. GCC, Clang, IAR, ARMCC).

<!-- excerpt end -->

> 

Author: Sentence sounds good to me, I worked the just of it into the excerpt

{:.no_toc}

## Table of Contents

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
* auto-gen TOC:
{:toc}

## Terminology

### Executable and Linkable Format (ELF)

Introduced in the late 1980s as part of the Unix operating system, ELF has become the ubiquitous
output format used by compilers for embedded development. A full discussion of the ELF file format

> is outside the scope of this article but at a high level it's a binary data format which holds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is outside the scope of this article, but at a high level, it's a binary data format which holds
```

> Fun Fact: "The name DWARF is something of a pun, since it was developed along with the ELF object file
> format. The name is an acronym for “Debugging With Arbitrary Record Formats”".[^2]

When a program is compiled with debug information enabled (e.g. with the `-g` CFLAG when using GCC
or Clang), this information will be written into special `.debug_` ELF sections that look like:

```
$ readelf -S <ELF>
  ...
  [ 8] .debug_info       PROGBITS        00000000 0200f4 00980b 00      0   0  1
  [ 9] .debug_abbrev     PROGBITS        00000000 0298ff 001adf 00      0   0  1
  [10] .debug_loc        PROGBITS        00000000 02b3de 003bf7 00      0   0  1
  [11] .debug_aranges    PROGBITS        00000000 02efd5 0004f0 00      0   0  1
  [12] .debug_ranges     PROGBITS        00000000 02f4c5 0007d8 00      0   0  1
  [13] .debug_macro      PROGBITS        00000000 02fc9d 0031dd 00      0   0  1
  [14] .debug_line       PROGBITS        00000000 032e7a 005447 00      0   0  1
  [15] .debug_str        PROGBITS        00000000 0382c1 00dedd 01  MS  0   0  1
```

### stabs, COFF, XCOFF

While rather infrequent, if you are working with custom compilers (such as

> those shipped with some DSPs), you may see binary / debug information emitted in alternative formats such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those shipped with some DSPs), you may see binary or debug information emitted in alternative formats such as
```

> stabs, COFF, or XCOFF. These are all legacy formats that have largely been superseded by ELF +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stabs, COFF, or XCOFF. These are all legacy formats that have largely been superseded by ELF and
```

> DWARF. I view it as a red-flag in the evaluation process if a vendors compiler emits information in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DWARF. I view it as a red-flag in the evaluation process if a vendor's compiler emits information in
```

these formats. At this point, a lot of binary inspection tools have deprecated support

> for these formats. This makes it harder to debug and workaround issues on chips using these formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for these formats, and it makes it harder to debug and workaround issues on chips using these legacy formats.
```

## Examples

> 

Reviewer: Tell me first that you are going to show me some examples and why you are

Author: I've relocated this to a > NOTE at the beginning of the "Binutil Command Examples" section

All the example code used in the sections below can be found in it's entirety
[on Github](https://github.com/memfault/interrupt/tree/master/example/best-of-binutils). If you
would like to follow along and build any of the sources yourself you can find more information there.

## GNU Binutils

GNU Binutils is a collection of supporting tools that work alongside GNU GCC to inspect and edit binaries.
We'll go into details below but most of the tools operate on ELFs. On linux and for embedded

> devices both individual object files (`.o`) and the final linked output (the ELF) are in this format.

Reviewer: GNU Binutils is a collection of tools that is used alongside GNU GCC to inspect and edit binaries.
Most of these tools operate on ELFs, and for linux and for most embedded software, both the individual object files (`.o`) and the final linked output (the ELF) are in this format.

That took me too long to re-work :/

> ### Compiling Binutils From Source

Reviewer: Add an Install Binutils with Package Manager section?

`brew install binutils` or `apt install binutils` btw.

Sometimes it can be fun (or useful) to compile the latest GNU Binutil to get a preview of
unreleased features or customize the supported architecture targets that are supported:

> ```

Reviewer: If you want to also try compiling from source, you can try the below steps. 

....

If you'd rather use a pre-compiled version, you can run either `brew install binutils` or `apt install binutils`

Author: neat, looks like its a multi-arch target too ... didnt realize

$ git clone git://sourceware.org/git/binutils-gdb.git
$ git log --oneline -1
3349112e38 elf: Remove zero-sized relocation section from section group
$ ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/binutils_latest/arm-none-eabi --target=arm-none-eabi
--with-python --disable-ld
$ make
$ # Wait 10-20 minutes ...

> $ ./binutils/size --version

Reviewer: I think your snippet above will compile an `arm-none-eabi-size`, right?

Author: Only once you run `make install` and its installed somewhere in /usr/. Here I'm just executing things inline from the repo

GNU size (GNU Binutils) 2.34.50.20200404
Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This program is free software; you may redistribute it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License version 3 or (at your option) any later version.
This program has absolutely no warranty.
```

### Compiling Binutils For Multiple Targets

A typical GNU Binutil release will only include select targets. For example, the official GNU ARM

> toolchain[^4] includes:

Reviewer: I finally learned to use keywords instead of numbers (sincee I find them difficult to keep track of). 

So, if you'd like to you can do:

```
toolchain[^toolchain] includes:

[^toolchain]: <link
```

```
$ arm-none-eabi-addr2line --help | grep "supported targets"

arm-none-eabi-addr2line: supported targets: elf32-littlearm elf32-littlearm-fdpic
elf32-bigarm elf32-bigarm-fdpic elf32-little elf32-big srec symbolsrec
verilog tekhex binary ihex plugin
```

However, Binutils can also be compiled to support multiple architectures / targets from the same binary!
If you are switching between architectures frequently, you can compile a
single Binutil's image by utilizing the `--enable-targets` configure option. You can provide a comma separated list
of targets to enable or everything can be enabled with`--enable-targets=all` (which flips on over
250 targets!).

## Binutil Command Examples

### readelf

`readelf` lets us get overall summaries of the different sections of an ELF.

#### Dumping Sections in an ELF

With the `-S` option, we can see the sections that will be included in the final binary as well as sections with special
information such as the `.debug_*` or `NOTE` sections.

```bash

> # arm-none-eabi-readelf -S nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -S nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

  [11] .debug_aranges    PROGBITS        00000000 02efd5 0004f0 00      0   0  1
  [12] .debug_ranges     PROGBITS        00000000 02f4c5 0007d8 00      0   0  1
  [13] .debug_macro      PROGBITS        00000000 02fc9d 0031dd 00      0   0  1
  [14] .debug_line       PROGBITS        00000000 032e7a 005447 00      0   0  1
  [15] .debug_str        PROGBITS        00000000 0382c1 00dedd 01  MS  0   0  1
  [16] .comment          PROGBITS        00000000 04619e 000079 01  MS  0   0  1
  [17] .ARM.attributes   ARM_ATTRIBUTES  00000000 046217 000032 00      0   0  1
  [18] .debug_frame      PROGBITS        00000000 04624c 000d8c 00      0   0  4
  [19] .symtab           SYMTAB          00000000 046fd8 0014c0 10     20 265  4
  [20] .strtab           STRTAB          00000000 048498 000905 00      0   0  1
  [21] .shstrtab         STRTAB          00000000 048d9d 0000df 00      0   0  1
Key to Flags:
  W (write), A (alloc), X (execute), M (merge), S (strings), I (info),
  L (link order), O (extra OS processing required), G (group), T (TLS),
  C (compressed), x (unknown), o (OS specific), E (exclude),
  y (purecode), p (processor specific)
```

#### Dumping Compiler ABI Info

> Every MCU architecture has an Application Binary Interface (ABI) -- which details things such as the registers

Reviewer: Not sure why you are using `--` in this post so frequently.

> Every MCU architecture has an Application Binary Interface (ABI) -- which details things such as the registers
> the compiler should use for passing arguments and the registers that must be be preserved across function
> calls. Sometimes a given architecture may have several ABI configuration options which can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every MCU architecture has an Application Binary Interface (ABI). An ABI details things such as which registers
to use for passing arguments and which ones must be preserved across function calls. Sometimes, a given
architecture may have several ABI configuration options which can be
```

> selected via compiler flags. For example, on ARMv7-m

Reviewer: ```suggestion
selected via compiler flags. For example, on ARMv7-m,
```

there are two different ABIs which can be used for passing floating point arguments as parameters -- one which
passes arguments in "VFP" registers and one which uses general purpose registers[^5]. We can

> discover what options are used along with some other information by using readelf's`-A` argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
discover which options are used along with some other information by using readelf's `-A` argument:
```

```bash

> arm-none-eabi-readelf -A nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -A nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

Attribute Section: aeabi
File Attributes
  Tag_CPU_name: "7E-M"
  Tag_CPU_arch: v7E-M
  Tag_CPU_arch_profile: Microcontroller
  Tag_THUMB_ISA_use: Thumb-2
  Tag_FP_arch: VFPv4-D16
  Tag_ABI_PCS_wchar_t: 4
  Tag_ABI_FP_denormal: Needed
  Tag_ABI_FP_exceptions: Needed
  Tag_ABI_FP_number_model: IEEE 754
  Tag_ABI_align_needed: 8-byte
  Tag_ABI_enum_size: small
  Tag_ABI_HardFP_use: SP only
  Tag_ABI_VFP_args: VFP registers
  Tag_ABI_optimization_goals: Aggressive Size
  Tag_CPU_unaligned_access: v6
```

#### Dumping DWARF Information

A DWARF section is comprised of a sequence of Debugging Information Entries referred to as
DIEs. You can use readelf to dump a human readable representation of all the debug information in
the ELF:

```bash

> $arm-none-eabi-readelf --debug-dump nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf --debug-dump nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

    <15>   DW_AT_comp_dir    : (indirect string, offset: 0x3692): example/best-of-binutils
    <19>   DW_AT_ranges      : 0x18
    <1d>   DW_AT_low_pc      : 0x0
    <21>   DW_AT_stmt_list   : 0x0
    <25>   DW_AT_GNU_macros  : 0x0
[...]
```

#### Auditing Compiler Flag Settings

There's certain DIEs that are often interesting to look at in isolation. For example, you can
look at `DW_AT_producer` DIE on GCC and Clang to see the compiler flags which were used.

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf --debug-dump nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf |
   grep DW_AT_producer.*:

    <c>   DW_AT_producer    :
    (indirect string, offset: 0x2cc5): GNU C17 9.2.1 20191025 (release)
    [ARM/arm-9-branch revision 277599]
    -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mfloat-abi=hard -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16 -mthumb
    -march=armv7e-m+fp -g3 -Os -ffunction-sections -fdata-sections
```

> NOTE: For more details about good compiler flag settings for embedded devices in general, check out our
> post on the topic [here]({% post_url 2019-10-22-best-and-worst-gcc-clang-compiler-flags %}).

#### Read GNU Build ID

When using a GNU build ID, the `-n` option can be used to quickly
print note sections and see the value

```bash

> arm-none-eabi-readelf -n nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -n nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

> [this article]({% post_url 2019-05-29-gnu-build-id-for-firmware %}).

### strings

As the name implies, `strings` will display all the strings in a binary. We can use the tool to:

1. To check for security holes in a binary (i.e encryption keys, hard coded passwords, etc)
2. As a mechanism for quickly saving [code space]({% post_url
   2019-08-20-code-size-optimization-gcc-flags %}). More often than not there are a couple
   unexpectedly long file names or command line strings in a binary that can be trimmed.

There's two particularly helpful arguments:

- `-d` - Causes only data sections (code in the actual binary) to be scanned instead of the entire
  info rather than parts of the ELF that are not in the binary.
- `-n <number>` - Can be used to control the minimum string length scanned for.

#### Leveraging strings to Save Code

Let's take a look at the longest strings in the Zephyr `samples/net/wifi` application `west build -b disco_l475_iot1`:

```bash
$ cd <zephyr_project>/samples/net/wifi
$ west build -b disco_l475_iot1

$ arm-none-eabi-strings -n5 -d build/zephyr/zephyr.elf |
   awk '{ print length, $0 }' | sort -n
// ...

> 94 Ctrl+a, Ctrl+b, Ctrl+c, Ctrl+d, Ctrl+e, Ctrl+f, Ctrl+k, Ctrl+l, Ctrl+n, Ctrl+p, Ctrl+u, Ctrl+w

Reviewer: What? No reverse sort?!

Author: hehe, my thought was then you would probably want a less pipe so you didn't have to scroll up

96 'net dns <hostname> [A or AAAA]' queries IPv4 address (default) or IPv6 address for a host name.
99 'net ping [-c count] [-i interval ms] <host>' Send ICMPv4 or ICMPv6 Echo-Request to a network host.
104 'log disable <module_0> .. <module_n>' disables logs in specified modules (all if no modules specified).
130 'log enable <level> <module_0> ...  <module_n>' enables logs up to given level in specified modules (all if no modules specified).
148 Some terminals are not sending separate escape code for backspace and delete button. This command forces shell to interpret delete key as backspace.
159 Console gets terminal screen size or assumes 80 in case the readout fails. It must be executed after each terminal width change to ensure correct text display.
```

Neat! We've found a few long strings printed by the console that we could consider removing if we
were desperate to save some code space!

### nm

`nm` lets you inspect the locations and sizes of symbols within a binary. It can be a quick way to

> find where particular symbols are located or identify what symbols are taking up a lot of space in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
find the address of particular symbols or identify which symbols are taking up the most space in
```

a binary.

The default output looks like this:

```bash
arm-none-eabi-nm  build/zephyr/zephyr.elf
# symbol address | section type | symbol name |
080107cc T z_unpend_thread_no_timeout
080009e0 T z_vprintk
0800c2b2 T z_work_q_main
```

#### Decoding nm Section Type

The section type is a one character shorthand where:

| Shorthand | Type |
| `t` or `T` | text symbol |
| `r` or `R` | read only data symbol |
| `d` or `D`|read/write data symbol |
| `b` or `B` |BSS / Zero initialized symbol|

Letters are capitalized if the symbol is global and lower case if the symbols are static to
the compilation unit (i.e C file).

#### Useful arguments

- `-S` - print the size of the symbol
- `-l` - print the line number
- `--size-sort` - sort the symbols by size and display the sizes.
- `-t` - change the radix. For example numbers can be displayed in decimal instead of hex by using
  `-t dec`

#### Finding Largest Symbols

> We can use `nm` to quickly identify what the largest objects in the binary are. When doing this I like to change the radix to decimal and use the `--size-sort` argument. Let's try it out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use `nm` to quickly identify what the largest objects in the binary are. When doing this, I like to change the radix to decimal and use the `--size-sort` argument. Let's try it out:
```

my_library_function  lib_v1.c:6: Version 1
```

Now lets "refactor" the code and move our `my_library_function()` to a new file, `lib_v2.c`,
archive it into `mylib.a` and rebuild our final application:

```bash
$ cp lib_v1.c lib_v2.c
$ gcc -c -o lib_v2.o lib_v2.c
$ ar rcs mylib.a lib_v2.o
$ gcc main.c mylib.a
```

##### Pop Quiz: What do you expect to see print?

- A: `my_library_function lib_v1.c:6: Version 1`
- B: `my_library_function lib_v2.c:6: Version 1`

Let's try it out and find out:

```bash
$ ./a.out
my_library_function  lib_v1.c:6: Version 1
```

Interesting, we are seeing the print message from our original implementation which was in
`lib_v1.c` but not the new one from `lib_v2.c`.

We can use the `t` option of `ar` to display the contents of the archive:

```bash
ar t mylib.a
lib_v1.o
lib_v2.o
```

Aha, `lib_v1.o` is still in the archive. We can delete it using the `d` option and recompile:

```bash
$ ar d  mylib.a lib_v1.o
$ gcc main.c mylib.a
```

Now when we run `./a.out`, we see the print message from `lib_v2.c` as we would expect.

```bash
$ ./a.out
my_library_function  lib_v2.c:6: Version 1
```

#### Recreate static libraries to avoid using out-of-date objects

> The behavior we observed above is because unlike other Binutil commands, `ar` _appends_ to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior we observed above is because `ar`, unlike other Binutil commands, _appends_ to a
```

> pre-existing file if it exists. On embedded systems, since static libraries are relatively fast and

Reviewer: With embedded software, since building static libraries is relatively fast and creating a new archive is very fast, I recommend just deleting any pre-existing archive when a new one gets
generated.

creating a new archive is very fast, to
avoid confusion I recommend just deleting any pre-existing archive when a new one gets
generated. For example,

```bash
$(MYLIB_TARGET): $(MYLIB_OBJ_FILES)
    @echo "Generating $@"
    rm -f $@
    arm-none-eabi-ar rcs $@ $(MYLIB_OBJ_FILES)
```

This way you are guaranteed to not have stale object files in your archive even if you don't do a
full rebuild.

### objdump

`objdump` is a general purpose utility that is most helpful when trying to examine the assembly in

> a binary (and my personal favorite!). You can run `objdump` on the final

Reviewer: a binary. It's also my personal favorite!

ELF output or individual `.o` object files. While there are a
number of options, most of the time the following are most useful:

`-d` to display the assembly code for all executable sections.
`--disassemble=<symbol>` to display the assembly for just one function

Let's walk through a few examples of the types of questions we can answer by utilizing objdump.

#### Inspecting Stack Usage

> Above we saw one of the biggest functions in the zephyr elf we were looking at was

Reviewer: Zephyr ELF

 170:	2000000a    .word	0x2000000a
```

##### test_enum_to_str_v2 assembly

```
$ arm-none-eabi-objdump -d nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf  \
   --disassemble=test_enum_to_str_v1
00000174 <test_enum_to_str_v2>:
 174:	b140        cbz	r0, 188 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x14>
 176:	2801        cmp	r0, #1
 178:	d008        beq.n	18c <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x18>
 17a:	4b05        ldr	r3, [pc, #20]	; (190 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x1c>)
 17c:	4a05        ldr	r2, [pc, #20]	; (194 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x20>)
 17e:	2802        cmp	r0, #2
 180:	bf0c        ite	eq
 182:	4618        moveq	r0, r3
 184:	4610        movne	r0, r2
 186:	4770        bx	lr
 188:	4803        ldr	r0, [pc, #12]	; (198 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x24>)
 18a:	4770        bx	lr
 18c:	4803        ldr	r0, [pc, #12]	; (19c <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x28>)
 18e:	4770        bx	lr
 190:	20000019    .word	0x20000019
 194:	2000000a    .word	0x2000000a
 198:	2000000f    .word	0x2000000f
 19c:	20000014    .word	0x20000014
```

Interesting, while both functions have the same behavior, the switch case based approach winds up
being 50% smaller! It looks like the compiler has optimized that approach better by using a lookup table
instead of branching.

> #### New Feature: visualize jumps

Reviewer: Visualize Jumps or `--visualize-jumps`

Binutils is constantly adding new features. While writing this post, I discovered a new option in
`objdump`, `--visualize-jumps`, that was just released in binutils 2.34. This generates

> ascii art showing the branching flow within individual functions which will be very

Reviewer: ASCII

helpful for following control flow when stepping through assembly:

```

> $ binutils/objdump  --visualize-jumps=color --disassemble=test_enum_to_str_v2

Reviewer: Want to use `arm-none-eabi-objdump` here or keep `binutils/objdump`?

Author: It was intentional .. it's not yet available in an official arm toolchain

### strip

As the name implies, `strip` removes sections from an ELF. Most commonly you
will see it used for stripping things like debug info from an ELF:

```
# Confirm ELF originally has debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -S nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf | grep debug
  [ 8] .debug_info       PROGBITS        00000000 0200f4 00980b 00      0   0  1
  [ 9] .debug_abbrev     PROGBITS        00000000 0298ff 001adf 00      0   0  1
  [10] .debug_loc        PROGBITS        00000000 02b3de 003bf7 00      0   0  1
  [11] .debug_aranges    PROGBITS        00000000 02efd5 0004f0 00      0   0  1
  [12] .debug_ranges     PROGBITS        00000000 02f4c5 0007d8 00      0   0  1
  [13] .debug_macro      PROGBITS        00000000 02fc9d 0031dd 00      0   0  1
  [14] .debug_line       PROGBITS        00000000 032e7a 005447 00      0   0  1
  [15] .debug_str        PROGBITS        00000000 0382c1 00dedb 01  MS  0   0  1
  [18] .debug_frame      PROGBITS        00000000 046248 000d8c 00      0   0  4

# Remove debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-strip -g nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

# Confirm ELF no longer has debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -S nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf | grep debug

> 

Reviewer: REmove new line

```

### objcopy

`objcopy` is most commonly used as the last stage of a build to generate the `.bin` or `.hex` file which
can be flashed onto a device. Unlike an operating system where there is a "dynamic loader" that
resolves addresses and loads libaries at runtime, on embedded devices all of the memory locations
are typically resolved at compilation time.

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-objcopy firmware.elf firmware.bin -O binary
```

> NOTE: For an example of leveraging using objcopy to build a bootloader for an embedded device,
> check out [this post]({% post_url 2019-08-13-how-to-write-a-bootloader-from-scratch %}#putting-it-all-together).

#### Converting binaries into an object file

Sometimes for embedded development you may want to include binary artifacts into a firmware as a
byte array. For example, sometimes a firmware will include binaries that need to be loaded onto peripherals (i.e a GPS,
or accelerometer peripheral image). One neat thing you can do with objcopy is convert any binary blob into an object file that can
then be linked in your image.

> 

Reviewer: Sometimes, a firmware will include binaries that need to be loaded onto peripherals, such as a GPS or accelerometer firmware image. One neat thing you can do with objcopy is convert any binary blob into an object file that can
then be linked in your image.

For example, if you want to include `my_binary.bin` in an image, you could create a `.o` as
follows:

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-objcopy -I binary -O elf32-littlearm
   --add-section my_binary_section=my_binary.bin my_binary.bin my_binary.o
```

`objcopy` will emit symbols in the object that then make it easy to reference the blob from your
C Code:

```bash
arm-none-eabi-nm -S -l my_binary.o
00000031 D _binary_my_binary_bin_end
00000031 A _binary_my_binary_bin_size
00000000 D _binary_my_binary_bin_start
```

### addr2line

`addr2line` converts addresses back to function and line numbers.

#### Useful Arguments

- `-a` To show the address which was decoded. This can be useful when decoding multiple addresses
  at once or using `addr2line` in a batch processing mode.
- `-f` To display the function name the address is in
- `-e <ELF>` To specify the excutable to decode. (Otherwise, `addr2line` checks for `a.out` in the
  working directory and uses that.)

#### Example Usage

You can run it on a single address:

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-addr2line -a -f -e build/zephyr/zephyr.elf 0x08000946
  0x08000946
_printk_dec_ulong
zephyr/lib/os/printk.c:465

> 

Reviewer: remove new line

```

or pipe a bunch of addresses in from stdin and get them all decoded at once

```bash
$ echo -e "0x8000946\n0x8000336" |
   arm-none-eabi-addr2line -a -f -e build/zephyr/zephyr.elf
0x08000946
_printk_dec_ulong
zephyr/lib/os/printk.c:465
0x08000336
__udivmoddi4
```

> 

Reviewer: Plug for Memfault maybe: If you find yourself writing scripts to parse addresses from a crash output, you might like to try Memfault.

### size

`size` walks through the sections in the ELF and sums up the totals for all sections which are
allocated. This can be useful for getting a quick summary of what the binary footprint looks like:

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-size build/zephyr/zephyr.elf
text data bss dec hex filename
84340 2416 32157 118913 1d081 build/zephyr/zephyr.elf
```

> ## Other useful tools for examining ELFs

Reviewer: Alternative Tools for Examining ELFs

Author: Went with "Additional Tools ..."

There's a number of additional tools aside from GNU Binutils which I've found tremendously useful
over the years. While a full discussion of them is outside the scope of this article (and merits a
blog post of their own), I've included some of my favorite highlights here.

### Godbolt (aka Compiler Explorer)

No discussion of binary inspection is complete without a shout out to Compiler Explorer. This is an online tool
that allows you to compile snippets of code against a ridiculous amount of different compilers. Even better you can
create short urls and share links with friends.

For example, [here is](https://godbolt.org/z/iqeNUv) an interesting one I was looking at recently.

![](/img/best-of-binutils/compiler-explorer-example.png)

For ARMv7-M, 4 byte loads and store instructions (`ldr` and `str`, respectively) support unaligned
access. When compiling code for space optimizations (using `-Os` CFLAG), I would have expected unaligned
accesses to get optimized using this instruction. What I noticed is for some reason if the
unaligned store is through a packed structure, the optimization does not take place.

### pyelftools

> Pyelftools is a pure python package capable of parsing ELF and DWARF information. If you are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pyelftools is a pure Python package capable of parsing ELF and DWARF information. If you are
```

> looking to perform your own analysis on ELF files, I'd highly recommend checking out the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking to perform your own analysis on ELF files, I highly recommend checking out the
```

repo. There is an [examples](https://github.com/eliben/pyelftools/tree/master/examples) folder in
the project that you can use as inspiration to get started.

#### Pure Python GNU Binutils size Command Equivalent

As a quick example, we can implement an equivalent of the `size` binutil command in about 30 lines

> of python!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of Python!
```

Author: oof I was on the struggle bus capitalizing python

```python
# pyelftools_size.py
def _get_allocated_section_sizes(elffile):
    from elftools.elf.constants import SH_FLAGS

    text = data = bss = 0
    for section in elffile.iter_sections():
        sh_flags = section["sh_flags"]
        if sh_flags & SH_FLAGS.SHF_ALLOC == 0:
            continue  # Section is not in final binary

        section_size = section["sh_size"]

        if (sh_flags & SH_FLAGS.SHF_EXECINSTR != 0 or
            sh_flags & SH_FLAGS.SHF_WRITE == 0):
            text += section_size
        elif section["sh_type"] != "SHT_NOBITS":
            data += section_size
        else:
            bss += section_size

    return (text, data, bss)

def size_elf(fname):
    from elftools.elf.elffile import ELFFile

    with open(fname, "rb") as ef:
        text, data, bss = _get_allocated_section_sizes(ELFFile(ef))
    print(f"   text\t   data\t    bss\t    dec\t    hex\tfilename")
    tot = text + data + bss
    print(f"{text:7d}\t{data:7d}\t{bss:7d}\t{tot:7d}\t{tot:7x}\t{fname")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    import sys

    if len(sys.argv) < 2:
        print("Please specify a path to an ELF")
        exit(-1)
    size_elf(sys.argv[1])

```

> We can compare the binutil size to the python size to confirm it works!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can compare the binutil size to the Python size to confirm it works!
```

```bash
$ python pyelftools_size.py nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
   text    data     bss     dec     hex	filename
   6340     244   11684   18268    475c	nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
$ arm-none-eabi-size nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
   text    data     bss     dec     hex	filename
   6340     244   11684   18268    475c	nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

### LLVM

The LLVM project has [clones](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/index.html#gnu-binutils-replacements) of most of the binutil commands we discussed above as well as a
bunch of tools of its own. There's a healthy competition between the LLVM and GNU projects which
means if a new feature makes it to one of them, there's typically work already underway to bring
the other to parity. If you haven't looked at LLVM before, it's definitely worth checking out!

> ### abidiff

Reviewer: I'd move this one higher, it's probably something more people have not heard about.

```bash
$ ./a.out
my_library_function  lib_v2.c:6: Version 1
```

#### Recreate static libraries to avoid using out-of-date objects

The behavior we observed above is because `ar`, unlike other Binutil commands, _appends_ to a
pre-existing file if it exists. With embedded software, since creating a new archive is very fast,
I recommend just deleting any pre-existing archive when a new one gets generated. For example,

```bash
$(MYLIB_TARGET): $(MYLIB_OBJ_FILES)
    @echo "Generating $@"
    rm -f $@
    arm-none-eabi-ar rcs $@ $(MYLIB_OBJ_FILES)
```

This way you are guaranteed to not have stale object files in your archive even if you don't do a
full rebuild.

### objdump

`objdump` is a general purpose utility that is most helpful when trying to examine the assembly in
a binary. It's also my personal favorite!. You can run `objdump` on the final ELF output or
individual `.o` object files. While there are a number of options, most of the time the following
are most useful:

`-d` to display the assembly code for all executable sections.
`--disassemble=<symbol>` to display the assembly for just one function

> Let's walk through a few examples of the types of questions we can answer by utilizing objdump.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's walk through a few examples of the types of questions we can answer with objdump.
```

#### Inspecting Stack Usage

Above we saw one of the biggest functions in the Zephyr ELF we were looking at was
`z_printk`

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-objdump   -d build/zephyr/zephyr.elf
  --disassemble=eswifi_request_work | less
08003964 <eswifi_request_work>:
=> 8003964:       e92d 4ff0       stmdb   sp!, {r4, r5, r6, r7, r8, r9, sl, fp, lr}
   8003968:       f890 4071       ldrb.w  r4, [r0, #113]  ; 0x71
   800396c:       2c01            cmp     r4, #1
=> 800396e:       b08f            sub     sp, #60 ; 0x3c
   8003970:       4605            mov     r5, r0
   8003972:       f1a0 0698       sub.w   r6, r0, #152    ; 0x98
```

We can see a push of 9 registers and a subtraction of 60 bytes from `$sp` which tells us the stack
consumption for the function is around 96 bytes

> > If you are trying to do an in-depth stack uasge analysis you can also use the GCC compiler flag,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> If you are trying to do in-depth stack usage analysis you can also use the GCC compiler flag,
```

> `-fstack-usage`. This will emit `.su` files alongside the `.o` files which contain information of
> stack utilization for all the functions in the object file. Some tools, such as
> [puncover](https://github.com/memfault/puncover), can also analyze `.su` files to run worst-case
> stack depth analysis for call chains.

#### Examining Optimizations

When looking at backtraces in a debugger, sometimes functions that should be in the backtrace are
not displayed. While the compiler tries its best to emit debug information that allows for the

> backtraces to be recovered, sometimes certain optimizations (such as inlining) make this really

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
backtraces to be recovered, certain optimizations (such as inlining) make this really
```

 170:	2000000a    .word	0x2000000a
```

##### test_enum_to_str_v2 assembly

```
$ arm-none-eabi-objdump -d nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf  \
   --disassemble=test_enum_to_str_v1
00000174 <test_enum_to_str_v2>:
 174:	b140        cbz	r0, 188 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x14>
 176:	2801        cmp	r0, #1
 178:	d008        beq.n	18c <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x18>
 17a:	4b05        ldr	r3, [pc, #20]	; (190 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x1c>)
 17c:	4a05        ldr	r2, [pc, #20]	; (194 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x20>)
 17e:	2802        cmp	r0, #2
 180:	bf0c        ite	eq
 182:	4618        moveq	r0, r3
 184:	4610        movne	r0, r2
 186:	4770        bx	lr
 188:	4803        ldr	r0, [pc, #12]	; (198 <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x24>)
 18a:	4770        bx	lr
 18c:	4803        ldr	r0, [pc, #12]	; (19c <test_enum_to_str_v2+0x28>)
 18e:	4770        bx	lr
 190:	20000019    .word	0x20000019
 194:	2000000a    .word	0x2000000a
 198:	2000000f    .word	0x2000000f
 19c:	20000014    .word	0x20000014
```

Interesting, while both functions have the same behavior, the switch case based approach winds up
being 50% smaller! It looks like the compiler has optimized that approach better by using a lookup table

> instead of branching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instead of branching.

> Note: This behavior is subject to change from compiler version to compiler version.
```

#### New Feature: Visualize Jumps

Binutils is constantly adding new features. While writing this post, I discovered a new option in
`objdump`, `--visualize-jumps`, that was just released in binutils 2.34. This generates
ASCII art showing the branching flow within individual functions which will be very
helpful for following control flow when stepping through assembly:

```
$ binutils/objdump  --visualize-jumps=color --disassemble=test_enum_to_str_v2
   nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

![](img/best-of-binutils/visualize-jumps-binutils.png)

### strip

As the name implies, `strip` removes sections from an ELF. Most commonly you

> will see it used for stripping things like debug info from an ELF:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will see it used for stripping things like debug info from an ELF. If you are distributing your ELF files, stripping debug information can make it harder to reverse engineer your code. Here is an example:
```

  [10] .debug_loc        PROGBITS        00000000 02b3de 003bf7 00      0   0  1
  [11] .debug_aranges    PROGBITS        00000000 02efd5 0004f0 00      0   0  1
  [12] .debug_ranges     PROGBITS        00000000 02f4c5 0007d8 00      0   0  1
  [13] .debug_macro      PROGBITS        00000000 02fc9d 0031dd 00      0   0  1
  [14] .debug_line       PROGBITS        00000000 032e7a 005447 00      0   0  1
  [15] .debug_str        PROGBITS        00000000 0382c1 00dedb 01  MS  0   0  1
  [18] .debug_frame      PROGBITS        00000000 046248 000d8c 00      0   0  4

# Remove debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-strip -g nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf

# Confirm ELF no longer has debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -S nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf | grep debug
```

### objcopy

`objcopy` is most commonly used as the last stage of a build to generate the `.bin` or `.hex` file which
can be flashed onto a device. Unlike an operating system where there is a "dynamic loader" that
resolves addresses and loads libaries at runtime, on embedded devices all of the memory locations
are typically resolved at link time.

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-objcopy firmware.elf firmware.bin -O binary
```

> > NOTE: For an example of leveraging using objcopy to build a bootloader for an embedded device,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> NOTE: For an example of using objcopy to build a bootloader for an embedded device,
```

            sh_flags & SH_FLAGS.SHF_WRITE == 0):
            text += section_size
        elif section["sh_type"] != "SHT_NOBITS":
            data += section_size
        else:
            bss += section_size

    return (text, data, bss)

def size_elf(fname):
    from elftools.elf.elffile import ELFFile

    with open(fname, "rb") as ef:
        text, data, bss = _get_allocated_section_sizes(ELFFile(ef))
    print(f"   text\t   data\t    bss\t    dec\t    hex\tfilename")
    tot = text + data + bss
    print(f"{text:7d}\t{data:7d}\t{bss:7d}\t{tot:7d}\t{tot:7x}\t{fname")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    import sys

    if len(sys.argv) < 2:
        print("Please specify a path to an ELF")
        exit(-1)
    size_elf(sys.argv[1])

```

We can compare the binutil size to the Python size to confirm it works!

```bash
$ python pyelftools_size.py nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
   text    data     bss     dec     hex	filename
   6340     244   11684   18268    475c	nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
$ arm-none-eabi-size nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
   text    data     bss     dec     hex	filename
   6340     244   11684   18268    475c	nrf52_example/build/nrf52.elf
```

### abidiff

> [abidiff](https://sourceware.org/libabigail/manual/abidiff.html#) analyzes two ELFs and compare

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[abidiff](https://sourceware.org/libabigail/manual/abidiff.html#) analyzes two ELFs and compares
```

---

> title: "Best of GNU Binutils and other ELF introspection tools"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Digging into ELF files for fun & profit"
```

> title: "Best of GNU Binutils and other ELF introspection tools"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Binutils: the Firmware Swiss Army Knife"
```

> title: "Best of GNU Binutils and other ELF introspection tools"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Dig into your Elf Files with Binutils"
```

> title: "Best of GNU Binutils and other ELF introspection tools"

Reviewer 2: Just a few title options

  [ 9] .debug_abbrev     PROGBITS        00000000 0298ff 001adf 00      0   0  1
  [10] .debug_loc        PROGBITS        00000000 02b3de 003bf7 00      0   0  1
  [11] .debug_aranges    PROGBITS        00000000 02efd5 0004f0 00      0   0  1
  [12] .debug_ranges     PROGBITS        00000000 02f4c5 0007d8 00      0   0  1
  [13] .debug_macro      PROGBITS        00000000 02fc9d 0031dd 00      0   0  1
  [14] .debug_line       PROGBITS        00000000 032e7a 005447 00      0   0  1
  [15] .debug_str        PROGBITS        00000000 0382c1 00dedb 01  MS  0   0  1
  [18] .debug_frame      PROGBITS        00000000 046248 000d8c 00      0   0  4

# Remove debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-strip -g build/nrf52.elf

# Confirm ELF no longer has debug info
$ arm-none-eabi-readelf -S build/nrf52.elf | grep debug

```

### objcopy

objcopy is most commonly used as the last stage of a build to generate the `.bin` or `.hex` file which
can be flashed onto a device. Unlike an operating system where there is a "dynamic loader" that
resolves addresses and loads libaries at runtime, on embedded devices all of the memory locations

> are typically resolved at compilation time.

Reviewer 3: compilation -> link?

```
$ arm-none-eabi-objcopy firmware.elf firmware.bin -O binary
```

#### Converting binaries into an object file

Sometimes for embedded development you may want to include binary artifacts into a firmware as a
byte array. For example, a firmware that needs to be loaded on a peripheral during boot
up. One neat thing you can do with objcopy is convert any binary blob into an object file that can
then be linked in your image.

For example, if you want to include `my_binary.bin` in an image, you could create a `.o` as
follows:

```

> arm-none-eabi-objcopy -I binary -O elf32-littlearm --add-section my_binary_section=my_binary.bin  my_binary.bin my_binary.o

Reviewer 3: :heart: x100 this approach!
